okay guys so it's close to the new year
a lot of people want to lose weight and
we here at healthy gamer are
here to help you do that so i'm dr k um
one of the co-founders of healthy gamer
and today i want to talk to you guys
about some of the scams of the weight
loss industry
and frankly why it's hard to lose weight
and at healthy gamer you know our main
goal is to teach people how stuff works
right
so my hope is that by explaining a
little bit about how weight loss works
some of the science behind it and also a
little bit about how the weight loss
industry works we can empower you guys
to actually achieve some of your goals
and live sort of a healthier happier
life okay
so we're gonna jump in with talking a
little bit about the diet industry
so i want you guys to just think about
this for a second so the diet industry
has been growing the wellness industry
is growing
they're now multi-billion dollar
industries we have
a lot of advances in medical science you
know a lot of people are studying
um weight loss and obesity and all these
kinds of things
we have all these qualified
professionals like nutritionists
endocrinologists medical doctors
personal trainers
there's so many people out there that
are their job is to
help you lose weight and we have a whole
industry that's spending billions of
dollars on helping you lose weight
and what's happening across the world
people are getting fatter
right so obesity is actually on the rise
and it blows my mind that this is
actually happening right now
that despite all of the advances in
medical science despite
this gigantic industry people overall
are still getting more and more obese
and more and more unhealthy
and so the question is like why is that
right so
what's going on here and can we
understand a little bit about the
science of weight loss
which may explain why actually going on
crash diets
doesn't actually help you lose weight it
actually potentially makes it harder for
you to lose weight and we'll dig into
the science behind that
so let's start by talking a little bit
about crash diets right so you guys may
have heard of
things like you know 20 30 years ago it
was the south beach diet
then people were doing this thing when i
was in college called the master cleanse
which is when you drink like a bunch of
like lemonade with cayenne pepper in it
for like five days
and nowadays everyone's like low carb
paleo like
everyone's got these kind of new diets
atkins diet whatever
and the the goal of these diets is to
kind of help you lose weight in sort of
a drastic
manner and we see this a lot where
people like oh i need to get in shape
for the summer i need to get in shape
for a wedding so like i want to lose 10
pounds
in 15 days and i heard about this person
that did it they posted it all over
their social media and instagram
so that's what i'm gonna do too and so
the diet industry loves to sell you
these kinds of
of weight loss programs right they say
stick with this diet and you'll lose
this amount of weight in this amount of
time
but the reason that all of the the diet
industry exists is because
none of those really work and what do i
mean by that i mean if we just think
about that for a second
if these solutions actually worked then
the industry wouldn't be there right
everyone would be in shape
and so if the industry is actually
growing and growing and growing
it doesn't mean that their their methods
are effective it actually means the
exact opposite
that their methods i know this sounds
really bizarre but the more that people
invest in the diet industry the more
obese we're getting
so is there actually a scientific reason
behind that and i know it sounds
absolutely crazy
but there actually is and there's
actually really strong data
that going on crash diets actually
causes you to get
fatter and the main scientific theory
that's behind this is something called
set
point theory and what setpoint theory
basically says is that your body has an
ideal weight that it homeostatically
tries to maintain
so your your body actually has an ideal
weight that it is going to try to
maintain and if you try to lose weight
it'll actually fight against you and if
you go over your
set weight it'll actually start to lose
weight and i know it sounds really weird
but let's just think about this for a
second so let's say you and your friend
may not be the same weight
even though you guys eat roughly the
same stuff right most human beings eat
around 2000 calories a day
and it's not like people who weigh 300
pounds
eat twice as many calories as people who
weigh 150 pounds
and so if we look at a population that's
roughly eating the same amount of
calories
how do we explain some people being way
heavier in some people being way lighter
well it turns out that set point theory
perfectly explains that
each of these people all of us have this
internal calculator
that tells us how much we should weigh
and so that's the idea behind set point
theory so the first study that i want to
talk to you guys a little bit about is
from the journal of nutrition
and it basically explains the concept of
of
set points which is sort of this
intrinsic biological capacity to stay at
a particular
weight so let's try to look at what
happens when people actually go on a
crash diet
so when we lose a lot of weight our
internal body is like oh my god we're
losing a bunch of weight we better
compensate for all this weight loss
because otherwise we're going to end up
in starvation
and so one of the things that it does is
it changes something called your basic
metabolic rate
it changes the way that you expend
energy and it tries to conserve that
energy
so basically in a gaming analogy what
this means is that like we're losing a
bunch of weight and then our body is
saying oh my god weight loss is op
so let's nerf weight loss and let's
change the way that our body
holds on to energy and i know this
sounds absolutely crazy but that's
exactly what happens
so there's a great study from the new
england journal of medicine which is one
of the most prestigious and
well-respected journals in the world
that basically talks a little bit about
how when you lose weight
your body compensates by slowing down
its metabolism
and so basically what it says is that
this weight loss is too drastic
let's conserve our calories let's hold
on to weight as much as possible
and the other thing that's really really
scary about this is that
there's another study in the american
journal of nutrition that suggests that
this compensatory mechanism that causes
your
body to hold on to calories when you go
through a drastic period of weight loss
actually lasts even if you gain the
weight back
so what that means is that if you go
through a drastic period of weight loss
your body thinks you're starving and it
starts to actually make changes to your
metabolism
to cause you to hold on to calories in a
more desperate way
it tries to compensate and even if you
start to gain weight again
those changes to your body those periods
of starvation will actually remain
and you'll actually start to be
potentially even go above your set point
and set a new set point that is actually
higher than your old weight and so what
this really means
it sounds absolutely crazy is that
if you do drastic weight loss your body
will try to
keep you conserving more calories and
you could actually wind up
at a higher weight than you used to and
that's actually what setpoint theory
tells us
so let's think about that for just a
second so why does our body do that and
it turns out that it's actually
evolutionary
so if we go through a period of
starvation you know
the organisms that were able to be more
calorie efficient
after those periods of starvation were
the ones that were more likely
to survive future periods of starvation
so our body basically learns from this
period of
of enforced starvation and says we
better hold on to weight as quickly as
possible or as
severely as possible and so the problem
with this is that if we kind of switch
back to the diet industry for a second
you know the diet industry is really
interesting because what it does is
it helps us lose weight for a brief
period of time
and then what inevitably happens is we
gain all the weight back
right and then something very very
important happens is that we don't blame
our physiology or the diet industry for
that what we do is we say oh my god i
lack discipline i'm lazy
i lost the weight and i just needed to
stick with the diet if only i had stuck
with the diet then i would have kept the
weight off
whereas in reality what's going on is
sure you may have deviated from the diet
because they're not really sustainable
but then we we kind of walk out of that
scenario thinking that the diet
worked but we didn't and that's not
really what's going on actually what's
going on is that the crash diet that you
went on
is actually changing your metabolism to
gain weight afterwards so it's kind of
like it's a huge scam
and a huge point of misunderstanding um
and so another thing just about a set
point theory like so a lot of people
when they diet
they diet with the idea that okay so i'm
eating 2 000 calories a day right now
i'm not gaining weight i'm not losing
weight
so if i go on a crash diet and i lose 15
pounds
and i go back to a like my regular diet
i'll stay at that new lower weight i
won't gain weight i won't lose weight
but that doesn't really work because
exactly what happens is setpoint theory
sort of kicks in and says oh my god
we've lost too much weight so
even if you eat the same amount that
you're eating right now you'll actually
gain weight and may even end up at a
higher weight than you started at which
is what's really scary
so you can go on a crash diet nowadays
they're kind of like you these no carb
diets um you can even kind of like do
all this kind of stuff and you can sort
of end up with the idea that
discipline is the problem oh you should
have stuck with it but the real truth is
that if you go on these crash diets and
if you do this this really drastic stuff
then kind of no matter what happens
you're going to sort of gain your weight
back
so what ends up happening is that you
start to view yourself as a failure
rather than the diet as a failure
and when you gain it back it becomes
this abusive cycle of like losing weight
and gaining
weight and each time you know you think
oh the diet worked but i didn't work so
then you go back to the diet
industry you buy more books you go on
another crash diet
as you go on your second crash diet your
set point actually increases further
and as you start to introduce even a
healthy normal diet
you notice that the weight actually goes
back to where you used to be
which is what most people's experience
with the diet industry is
so then we kind of get to the quite the
main question which is okay what do we
do about it right so how do we lose
weight
if crash diets don't work if the diet
industry doesn't work
how is it possible to actually lose
weight and it turns out there are a
bunch of solutions and this is
kind of what we're going to get into
there are a lot of things that you can
do once you understand what your
physiology is to actually
lead to sustained weight loss right so
we don't want to institute something
where
our body says oh my god this weight loss
is too op
nerf this this is op like let's correct
it
what we want to do is sustained weight
loss solutions
through sustained action and
they're actually really good ways to do
that really good ways to understand your
physiology that lead to
constant and relatively easily
sustainable changes to your weight
so don't crash diet because it's
actually going to make it harder to lose
weight and there's a great
there's a great paper from american
psychologists that sort of
digs into why like losing weight will
actually cause you to binge more
so here are just a couple of things that
you can do so the first thing to
understand is that sustained weight loss
is gained through sustained action
you need to change your diet on a daily
basis it can't be a temporary thing
the good news is that you may not even
need to change it much there are small
sustainable things that you can do
that will actually change your weight in
a relatively
efficient way there are all kinds of
interesting solutions that we can do
based on our understanding of science
and a good example of this
is flax seeds so flax seeds actually
increase our leptin sensitivity and so
people may ask okay what is leptin
so in our body we have two hormones
leptin and ghrelin
leptin is the hormone that tells us hey
we're feeling full
and ghrelin is the hormone that says hey
we're hungry we need to eat more
so what we find in people who are
overweight is that they are actually
resistant to leptin and so what that
means is that there's a hormone
that is telling you hey we've had enough
food
but you are resistant to that signal so
you're not really receiving that message
and flax seeds have actually been shown
to increase leptin sensitivity
so what that means is that if you're
eating a particular meal and you add
let's say like a teaspoon of flax seeds
on top literally that
meal's capacity to make you feel full
goes up with that teaspoon of flax seeds
so a lot of simple things that you can
do
that will sort of play with that
hormonal balance and allow you to
actually
feel more full and your body will start
to tell you hey we actually don't need
to eat as much because
you know your leptin is actually
functioning as normal
other things that we can do are actually
increased sun exposure
there's actually a great uh paper that
sort of explores this is a
from the medical journal medical
hypotheses
um that explores how obesity and vitamin
d
deficiency are actually linked and
there's some good evidence behind this
but some of it is also theoretical
but literally this can be as simple as
exposing yourself to sunlight
and so sun exposure may actually help
lead to weight loss through correcting
vitamin d mechanisms
and if that sounds really biz bizarre
just think for a second about you know
how your body functions
and there's a really simple um sort of
causation
between sunlight exposure and weight
gain and it's simply that people in
northern climates
are less exposed to sunlight people in
northern climates tend to have heavier
winters
and in the winter time you have less
access to food so evolutionarily what
our body does is says
oh if there's not a whole lot of
sunlight we need to store calories
so you can do something as simple as
just getting some sunlight
which actually produces vitamin d and is
more likely to make you lose weight
so these are just a couple of the
solutions that we're introducing you
guys
with today um and there are actually a
lot of other solutions that will empower
you to get control of your weight
and sort of lead to a sustained weight
loss and so we don't want
i really don't want you all to blame
yourself for your weight loss just
understand how your physiology works and
then start to institute changes
that will lead to sort of a sustained
and healthy weight and that's really
what we're here about
so i hope that was helpful thanks a lot
and good luck in the new year from dr k
and healthy gamer
you